{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Monaco;}{\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}}{\stylesheet{\fs22\f0\sqformat\spriority1 Normal}{\s1\f0\fs22\sbasedon0\sqformat\spriority1 Body Text}{\s2\li120\sb273\outlinelevel0\f1\fs49\b1\sbasedon0\sqformat\spriority1 Heading 1}{\s3\li120\outlinelevel1\f1\fs28\b1\sbasedon0\sqformat\spriority1 Heading 2}{\s4\sbasedon0\sqformat\spriority1 List Paragraph}{\s5\sbasedon0\sqformat\spriority1 Table Paragraph}}{\info{\author Christopher Kelty}{\creatim\yr2018\mo5\dy17\hr11\min3\sec40}{\revtim\yr2018\mo5\dy17\hr18\min4\sec28}}{\*\userprops {\propname Creator}\proptype30{\staticval Emacs 25.3.1 (Org mode 9.1.13)}}\jexpand\dntblnsbdb\viewkind1\noxlattoyen\nospaceforul\useltbaln\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1680\margr0\margt1500\margb1760\sectd\sbkpage\pgnrestart\pgnstarts1\headery0\footery1568
{\footer 
{\shp{\*\shpinst\shpleft5972\shpright6269\shptop14052\shpbottom14368\shpbxpage\shpbypage\shpwr3\shpfblwtxt1\shpz0\shplid25{\sp{\sn fBehindDocument}{\sv 1}}
{\sp{\sn shapeType}{\sv 202}}{\sp{\sn fFlipH}{\sv 0}}{\sp{\sn fFlipV}{\sv 0}}
{\sp{\sn txflTextFlow}{\sv 0}}
{\sp{\sn fFilled}{\sv 0}}
{\sp{\sn fLine}{\sv 0}}
{\sp{\sn dxTextLeft}{\sv 0}}{\sp{\sn dxTextRight}{\sv 0}}{\sp{\sn dyTextTop}{\sv 0}}{\sp{\sn dyTextBottom}{\sv 0}}
{\sp{\sn posrelh}{\sv 1}}
{\sp{\sn posrelv}{\sv 1}}
{\shptxt\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li40\sl240\slmult1\sb20\f0\fs22\b0{\field {\*\fldinst { PAGE }}}\par}}}
\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl14\slmult1\fs20\par}\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s2\nooverflow\nocwrap\li3178\fi-2773\ri1978\sl254\slmult1\sb223\f1\fs49\b1\charscalex105 Recursive Publics and \f1\fs49\b1\i0\expnd0\expndtw2 Open \f1\fs49\b1\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Access \f1\fs49\b1\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 (Version\expnd9\expndtw47  \f1\fs49\b1\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 2)\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1380\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1978\sl307\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-7\charscalex105 Ten \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 years ago, I published a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 book \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 with Duke University Press called \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Two Bits: The \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Cultural Significance \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 of \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-2\expndtw-11 Free \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Software \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (Kelty 2008).\fs16\up8 1 \f0\fs22\b0\i0\up0 The Press, and \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 my \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 editor Ken Wissoker, were enthusiastically accommodating of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 my \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 demands to make the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 book \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 freely  and openly available. They also \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 played \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 along with \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 my \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 desire to release the \'92source code\'92 of the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 book \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (i.e.  HTML files of the chapters with minimal markup), and to compare the data  on readers of the open version to print customers. It \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a moment of exploration for both scholarly presses and for\expnd11\expndtw55  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 me.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri2045\sl307\slmult1\sb10\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-4\charscalex105 At \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the time, few authors were doing this other than \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Yochai \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Benkler (Benkler 2007) and Cory Doctorow\fs16\up8 2  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\up0 both of whom are activists and advocates for free software and open   access (OA), \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 much \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 as I \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 been. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-2\expndtw-10 We \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 all shared, I think, a  certain  fanaticism  of  the convert that came from recognizing free software as an historically new, and radically different mode of organizing economic and political \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 activity. \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 Two Bits \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 gave \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 me a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 way  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to talk not only about free software, but about \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and the politics of the university (Kelty       et al. 2008; Kelty\expnd11\expndtw55  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 2014).\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb9\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Ten years later, I admit to a certain pessimism, if not outright depression at the way things have turned out. The promise of free software has foundered, though it has not disappeared, and the question of what it means to achieve OA\'97or the goals of OA\'97has been swamped by concerns about costs, arcane details of repositories and versioning, and ritual offerings to the metrics God.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1797\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex110 When I wrote \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Two Bits\f0\i0 , it \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 obvious to me that the collectives who built free software were \f4\fs22\b0\i1 essential \f0\fs22\b0\i0 to the very structure and operation of a standardized, singular Internet. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-7 Today, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 free software and \'92open source\'92 refer to quite dramatically different constellations\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 practice\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 people.\expnd1\expndtw3  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 gathers\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 around\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 itself\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 those\expnd-2\expndtw-12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 committed to the original and purist sense of a shared, collective, process of making software, tools, infrastructures, and hardware that cannot \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 appropriated \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 others, cannot \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 closed or otherwise sealed from view \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 anyone. In political terms, I \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 always \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 identified free software\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 with\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 very\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 specific,\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 updated,\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 version\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 classical\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Millian\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 liberalism.\expnd0\expndtw0  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 It\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 sustains\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a belief in the capacity for collective action and rational thought as aids to establishing a flourishing human livelihood. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-7 Yet \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it also preserves an outdated blind faith in the automatic functioning of meritorious speech, that the best ideas will inevitably rise to the top, regardless of context, situation, or \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 history. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 It is an updated classical liberalism that \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 saw\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 networks\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 new\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 place\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 resist\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 tyranny\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 conventional\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-1\expndtw-5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the taken for\expnd4\expndtw21  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 granted.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 By contrast, open source has come to mean something quite different: an ecosystem controlled \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 an oligopoly of firms which maintains a shared \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 pool \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of components and frameworks that \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 lower \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the costs of education, training, and software creation in the service  of\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 establishing\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 winner-take-all\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 platforms.\expnd8\expndtw41  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Winner-take-all\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 platforms\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 are\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 built\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 on\expnd3\expndtw16  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 open\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1380\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\ri1978\sl304\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 source, but they do not carry the principles of freedom or openness all the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 way \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 through to  the platforms themselves.\fs16\up8 3\fs22\up0 . What open source has become is \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 now  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 almost the opposite of  free software\'97it is authoritarian, plutocratic, and nepotistic, everything liberalism \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 wanted \expnd10\expndtw50  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 resist.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri2050\sl312\slmult1\sb6\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-7\charscalex105 For \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 example,precarious labor and platforms such as Uber  or  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Task  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Rabbit  are  built upon and rely on the fruits of the labor of \'92open source\'92, but the platforms that result do    not follow the same principles\'97they are not open or free in any meaningful sense. Quite  the reverse: their profitability demands that the labor of  open  source  creators  is  more often directed \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 towards \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 improvements in the underlying infrastructure which serve these platforms\'97and not the interests of the programmers, engineers, designers, or users who must maintain them, or live \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 them on a daily basis\'97 to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 say  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 nothing of the Uber drivers  or task rabbits who live \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd10\expndtw51  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 platforms.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1797\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex110 Does OA face the same problem? In part my desire to \'92free the source\'92 of my book grew out of the unfinished business of digitizing the scholarly record. It is an irony that much of the work that went into designing the internet at its outset in the 1980s, such as gopher, WAIS, and the HTML of CERN, was conducted in the name of the digital transformation of the library. But by 2007, these aims were swamped by attempts to transform the Internet into a giant factory of data extraction, and wars over\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 winner-take-all platforms for spying and surveillance in the name of advertising dollars. Even in 2006-7 it was clear that this unfinished business of digitizing the scholarly record was going to become a problem\'97both because it was being overshadowed by other concerns, and because of the danger it would eventually be subjected to the very platformization underway in other realms.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1868\sl309\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Because if the platform capitalism of today has ended up being parasitic on the free software tools and infrastructures that enabled it, then \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 why \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 would this not also \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 true of scholarship more generally? Are \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not witnessing a transition to a world where  scholarship is directed\'97in their very \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 content  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and organization\'97towards the profitability   of the platforms that ostensibly serve it?\fs16\up8 4 \f0\fs22\b0\i0\up0 Is it not possible, that the platforms created to \'92serve science\'92 \'97Elsevier\'92s increasing acquisition of tools to control the entire life-cycle of research, or ResearchGate\'92s ambition to become the single source for all academics to network and share research\'97that these platforms might actually end up warping the very \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 content \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of scholarly production in the service of their\expnd6\expndtw28  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 profitability?\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri2050\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-2\expndtw-10\charscalex105 To \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 put this even more clearly: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 has come to exist and scholarship is more \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 available \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and more widely distributed than ever before. But, scholars \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 now \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 less control, and  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 taken less responsibility for the means of production of scientific research, its circulation, and perhaps even the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 content \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of that\expnd4\expndtw18  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 science.\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s2\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb273\f1\fs49\b1\charscalex105 The Method of Modulation\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb8\f1\fs70\b1\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1797\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 When I wrote \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Two Bits \f0\fs22\b0\i0 I organized the argument around the idea of \f4\fs22\b0\i1 modulation\f0\i0 : free software is simply one assemblage of technologies, practices, and people aimed at resolving certain problems regarding the relationship between knowledge (or software tools related    to knowledge) and power (Hacking 2004; Rabinow 2003). \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software as such \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and  still is changing as each of its elements \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 evolve \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or are recombined. Because \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 derives some of its practies directly from free software, it is possible to observe how these different elements \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in been taken up and \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 worked \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 over \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in the recent past, as well as how new and surprising elements are combined with \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to transform it. Looking back on the elements I identified as central to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Software, one can ask: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 how \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 different, and what new elements\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 are\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 modulating\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 into\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 something\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 possibly\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 unrecognizable?\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb9\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex110 sharing source code:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1868\sl309\slmult1\sb278\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Shareable source code \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a concrete and necessary achievement for \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Software to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 possible. Similarly, the necessary ability to circulate digital texts is a significant achievement\'97but such texts are shareable in a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 much \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 different \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-2\expndtw-8 way. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-7 For \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 source code, computable streams of text are everything\'97anything else is a \'92blob\'92 like an image, a video or any binary file. But scholarly texts are, with rare exceptions, blobs: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Word \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or Portable Document \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Format \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (PDF) files. What\'92s more, while software programmers may \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 love \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 \'92source code\'92, academics generally hate it\'97anything less than the final, typeset version of a text is considered unfinished (see e.g. the endless disputes \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 over \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 \'92author\'92s final versions\'92 plagueing OA).\fs16\up8 5 \f0\fs22\b0\i0\up0 Finality is important. Modifiability of a text, especially in the humanities and social sciences,\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 acceptable\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 only\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 when\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 an\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 experiment\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 some\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 kind.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri2219\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 In an sense, the source code of science is not a code at all, but a more abstract set of relations between concepts, theories, tools, methods, and the disciplines and networks of people who operate with them, critique them, extend them and try to maintain control   \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 over \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 them even as they are shared within these\expnd6\expndtw30  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 communities.\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1320\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb77\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex110 defining openness:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb279\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-7\charscalex105 For \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Software to make sense as a solution, those \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 involved \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 first had to characterize the problem it solved\'97and they did so \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 identifying a pathology in the worlds of corporate capitalism and engineering in the 1980s: that computer corporations were closed organizations who \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 re-invented \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 basic tools and infrastructures in a race to dominate  a market. An \'92open system,\'92 \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 contrast, would \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 avoid \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the waste of \'92reinventing the wheel\'92 and of pathological competition, allowing instead modular, reusable parts that could \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 modified and recombined to build better things in an \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 upward \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 spiral of innovation. The  1980s ideas of modularity, modifiability, abstraction barriers, interchangeable units \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 been\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 essential\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 creation\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 digital\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 infrastructures.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1798\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-2\expndtw-10\charscalex105 To  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 propose an \'92open science\'92 thus modulates this definition\'97and the idea works in  some sciences better than others. Aside from the obviously different commercial contexts, philosophers and literary theorists just don\'92t think about openness this \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 way\'97 \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 theories and arguments \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 may  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 used as building blocks, but they are not modular in quite the same     \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-2\expndtw-8 way. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Only the free circulation of the work, whether for recombination or for reference and critique, remains a \f4\fs22\b0\i1 sine qua non \f0\fs22\b0\i0 of the theory of openness proposed there. It is opposed to  a system where it is explicit that only certain people \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 access to the texts (whether       that \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 through limitations of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 secrecy, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or limitations on intellectual \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 property, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or an implicit elitism).\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb7\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex115 writing and using copyright licenses:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri2219\sl312\slmult1\sb279\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Of all the components of free software that I analyzed, this is the one practice that remains the least transformed\'97 OA texts use the same CC licenses pioneered in 2001, which were a direct descendant of free software licenses.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 A \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 novel \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 modulation of these licenses is the \f5\fs22\b1\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f5\fs22\b1\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 policies \f0\fs22\b0\i0 pioneered in other \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 ways \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and places as part of the development of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (the embrace of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in Brazil for instance, or the spread of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Policies starting with Harvard and the University  of  California,  and extending to the EU Mandate from 2008 forward). \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Today \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the ability to control  the circulation of a text with IP rights is far less economically central to the strategies of publishers than it \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in 2007, even if they persist in attempting to do so.  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 At  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the same  time, funders, states, and universities \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 all adopted \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 patchwork \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 policies intended to both sustain green \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and push publishers to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 innovate \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 their \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 own \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 business models in gold and hybrid \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 While \'92Green OA\'92 is a significant success on paper, the actual use of it to circulate work pales in comparison to the commercial control of circulation on the one   hand,\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 increasing\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 success\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 shadow\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 libraries\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 on\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 other.\expnd8\expndtw40  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Repositories\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1380\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 sprung up in every shape and form, but they remain largely \f4\fs22\b0\i1 ad hoc\f0\i0 , poorly coordinated, and underfunded solutions to the problem of OA.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb10\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex115 coordinating collaborations:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\ri1868\sl312\slmult1\sb278\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 The \f4\fs22\b0\i1 collective \f0\fs22\b0\i0 activity of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Software is ultimately the most significant of its achievements\'97marrying a form of intensive small-scale interaction amongst programmers, with sophisticated software for managing complex objects (version control and GitHub-like sites). There has been constant innovation in these  tools  for  controlling,  measuring, testing, and maintaining\expnd9\expndtw43  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 By contrast, the collective activity of scholarship is still largely a pre-modern affair.  It  is coordinated largely \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the idea of \'92writing an article together\'92 and not \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 working to maintain some larger map of what a research topic, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 community, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or discipline has  explored\'97 what has \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 worked \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and what has\expnd11\expndtw53  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1952\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 This focus on the coordination of collaboration seemed to me to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 one of the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 key advantages \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of free software, but it has turned out to \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 almost totally absent from the  practice or discussion of OA. Collaboration and the recombination of elements of scholarly practice obviously happens, but it does not depend on \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 any \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 systematic \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 way: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 there is only the counterfactual that without it, many different kinds of people are excluded from collaboration or even simple participation in, scholarship, something that most active scholars are willfully ignorant\expnd11\expndtw53  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb8\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\sl240\slmult1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex115 fomenting a \f1\fs28\b1\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 movement:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\ri2219\sl312\slmult1\sb279\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 I demoted the idea of a social \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 movement \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to merely one component of the success of free software, rather than let it be\'97as most social scientists would \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it\'97the principal container for free software. As important as \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 movements \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and their participants are, they  are not the whole\expnd0\expndtw0  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 story.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Is there an \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA movement? \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-7 Yes \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and no. Librarians remain the most activist  and organized. The handful of academics who care about it \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 shifted to caring about it in primarily a bureaucratic sense, forsaking the cross-organizational aspects of a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 movement \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 favor \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of activism within universities (to which I plead guilty). But this transformation forsakes the need for addressing the collective, collaborative responsibility for scholarship   in \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 favor \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of letting individual academics, departments, and disciplines \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the focus for such debates.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 By contrast, the publishing industry works with a phantasmatic idea of both an OA \'92movement\'92 and of the actual practices of scholarship\'97 they too defer, in speech if not in\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1380\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1798\sl312\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 practice, to the academics themselves, but at the same time must create tools, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 innovate \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 processes, establish procedures, acquire tools and companies an so on in an effort to    capture\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 these\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 phantasms\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 prevent\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 academics\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 from\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 collectively\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 doing\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 so\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 on\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 their\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 own.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1863\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex110 And\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 what\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 new\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 components? The\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 five\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 above\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 were\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 central\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 free\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 as\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 I\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 analyzed it up to about 2006. But \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 has other components that are arguably more important to its organization and\expnd6\expndtw30  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 transformation.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb10\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex115 money, i.e. library budgets:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1698\sl312\slmult1\sb278\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex110 Central to almost all of the politics and debates about \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is the political economy of publication. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 From \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the \'92bundles\'92 debates of the 1990s to the gold/green debates of the 2010s, the sole source of money for publication long ago shifted into the library budget. The relationship that library budgets \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to other parts of the political economy of research (funding for research itself, debates about tenured/non-tenured, adjunct and other temporary salary structures) has shifted as a result of the demand for \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 leading libraries to re-conceptualize themselves as potential publishers, and publishers to re-conceptualize themselves as serving a \'92life cycles\'92 or \'92pipeline\'92 of research, not just its dissemination.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb10\f0\fs32\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex110 metrics:\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb279\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 More than anything, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is promoted as a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 way \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to continue to feed the metric gods. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 means more citations, more easily computable data, and more visible uses and re-uses of publications (as well as \'92open data\'92 itself, when conceived of as product and not measure). The innovations in the world of metrics\'97from the quiet expansion of the platforms of the publishers,\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 invention\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 \'92alt\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 metrics\'92\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 enthusiasm\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 \'92open\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 science\'92\expnd2\expndtw12  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 for\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 metrics-driven scientific methods\'97forms a core feature of what \'92OA\'92 is today, in a way that was not true of Free Software before it where metrics concerning users, downloads, commits, or lines of code were always after-the-fact measures of quality, and not constitutive ones.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\fi338\ri1868\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Other components of this sort might \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 proposed in an historical-ontological analysis of the transformation of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 but the main point of an exercise like this is to resist the temptation to clutch \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 as if it were the beating heart  of  a  social  transformation  in science, as if it were a \f4\fs22\b0\i1 thing \f0\fs22\b0\i0 that must exist, rather than a configuration of elements at a moment\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 time.\expnd8\expndtw40  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 OA\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 was\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 solution\'97but\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 too\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 easy\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 lose\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 sight\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 problem.\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s2\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1978\sl309\slmult1\sb273\f1\fs49\b1\charscalex105 Open Access without Recursive Publics\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb5\f1\fs56\b1\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1980\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 When \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 no longer \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 any commons, but only platforms, will \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 still \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 knowledge as \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 know \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it? This is a question at the heart of research in the philosophy and sociology of knowledge\'97not just a concern for activism or social \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 movements. \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 If knowledge is socially produced and maintained, then the nature of the social bond surely matters to the nature       of that knowledge. This is not so different than asking whether \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 will still \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 labor or work, as \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 long known it, in an age of precarity?  What is the knowledge equivalent  of precarity (i.e. not just the existence of precarious knowledge workers, but a kind of \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-4 precarious \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 knowledge \f0\fs22\b0\i0 as\expnd-4\expndtw-20  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 such)?\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1806\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex110 Do \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not already see the evidence of this in the \'92post-truth\'92 of fake news, or the deliberate\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 refusal\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 by\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 those\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 in\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 power\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 countenance\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 evidence,\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 truth,\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 or\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 established\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 systems of argument and debate? The relationship between knowledge and power is shifting dramatically, because the costs\'97and the stakes\'97of producing high \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 quality, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 authoritative knowledge\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 have\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 also\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 shifted.\expnd1\expndtw5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 It\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 so\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 powerful\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 any\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 longer;\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 science\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 does\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 speak\expnd-2\expndtw-11  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 truth to power because truth is no longer so obviously important to\expnd12\expndtw58  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 power.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\sl-252\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Although this is a pessimistic portrait, it may also be a sign of something yet to come.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1952\sl312\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-6\charscalex105 Free \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software as a \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 community, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 has been and still sometimes is critiqued as being an exclusionary space of white male sociality (Nafus 2012; Massanari 2016; \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Ford  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and  Wajcman 2017; Reagle 2013).  I think this critique is true, but it is less a problem of   identity than it is a pathology of a certain form of liberalism:  a form that demands that   merit consists only in the \f4\fs22\b0\i1 content \f0\fs22\b0\i0 of the things \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 say (whether in a political argument, a scientific paper, or a piece of code), and not in the \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 ways we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 say \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 them, or who is encouraged to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 say\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 them\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 who\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 encouraged\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 remain\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 silent\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (Dunbar-Hester\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 2014).\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\fi338\ri1807\sl312\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 One might, as a result, choose to throw out liberalism  altogether  as  a  broken philosophy of governance and liberation. But it might also  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 an  opportunity  to  focus \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 much \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 more specifically on a particular problem of liberalism, one that the discourse of \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 also\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 relies\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 on\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 large\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 extent.\expnd9\expndtw43  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Perhaps\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 not\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 case\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 that\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 merit\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 derives\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 solely\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 from\expnd3\expndtw15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\margtsxn1380\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri1909\sl312\slmult1\sb73\f0\fs22\b0\expnd-1\expndtw-3\charscalex110 content\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 utterances\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 freely\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 openly\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 circulated,\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 but\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 also\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 from\expnd-3\expndtw-15  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 ways\expnd-4\expndtw-18  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 in\expnd-4\expndtw-18  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 which\expnd-4\expndtw-18  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 they \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-4 are\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 uttered,\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 dignity\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-4 people\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 who\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 utter\expnd-8\expndtw-38  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 them\f0\i0 .\expnd-5\expndtw-25  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 An\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 OA\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (or\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 a\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 free\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 software)\expnd-7\expndtw-34  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 that embraced that principle would demand that \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 pay \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 attention to different problems: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 how \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 are our platforms, infrastructures, tools organized and built to support not just the circulation of putatively true statements, but the ability to say them in situated and particular\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 ways,\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 with\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 respect\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 for\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 dignity\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 who\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 is\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 saying\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 them,\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 with\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-1\expndtw-7  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 freedom to\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 explore\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 the\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 limits\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 that\expnd1\expndtw5  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 kind\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 liberalism,\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 should\expnd-1\expndtw-4  we \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 be\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 so\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 lucky\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 to\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 achieve\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 it.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb10\f0\fs23\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s3\nooverflow\nocwrap\li119\sl240\slmult1\sb101\f1\fs28\b1\charscalex120 Notes\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li368\ri4143\sl264\slmult1\sb229\f0\fs12\b0\up8\charscalex85 1{\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "https://twobits.net/download/index.html" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\up0 https://twobits.net/download/index.html}}
\f2\fs18\up0  \f0\fs12\b0\i0\up8\charscalex100 2{\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "https://craphound.com/" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\up0 https://craphound.com/}}
\f2\fs18\up0 \par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li368\sl-245\f0\fs12\b0\up8\charscalex105 3\fs18\up0 For example, Platform Cooperativism {\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "https://platform.coop/directory" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\b0\i0 https://platform.coop/directory}}
\f2\fs18\b0\i0 \par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li368\sl240\slmult1\sb20\f0\fs12\b0\up8\charscalex110 4\fs18\up0 See for example the figure from \'92Rent Seeking by Elsevier,\'92 by Alejandro Posada and George Chen ({\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://knowledgegap.org/index.php/sub-projects/rent-seeking-and-financialization-of-the-academic-publishing-industry/preliminary-findings/" }}{\fldrslt \f2 http:}}
\f2 \par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\ri-15\sl290\slmult1\sb62{\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://knowledgegap.org/index.php/sub-projects/rent-seeking-and-financialization-of-the-academic-publishing-industry/preliminary-findings/" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\b0\charscalex85 //knowledgegap.org/index.php/sub-projects/rent-seeking-and-financialization-of-the-academic-}}
\f2\fs18\b0\charscalex85 publishing-industr {\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://knowledgegap.org/index.php/sub-projects/rent-seeking-and-financialization-of-the-academic-publishing-industry/preliminary-findings/" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\b0\i0\charscalex100 preliminary-findings/}}
\f2\fs18\b0\i0\charscalex100 \f0 )\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li368\sl-223\f0\fs12\b0\up8 5\fs18\up0 see Sherpa/Romeo {\field {\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/index.php" }}{\fldrslt \f2\fs18\b0\i0 http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/index.php}}
\f2\fs18\b0\i0 \par\sect\sectd\sbkpage\headery0\footery1568\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb9\f2\fs16\b0\i0\par\pard\plain\s2\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb100\f1\fs49\b1\charscalex105 Bibliography\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\sl240\slmult1\sb8\f1\fs70\b1\i0\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1978\sl309\slmult1\f0\fs22\b0 Benkler, Yochai. 2007. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom\f0\i0 . Yale University Press.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1797\sl309\slmult1\sb93\f0\fs22\b0 Dunbar-Hester, Christina. 2014. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Low Power to the People: Pirates, Protest, and Politics in FM Radio Activism\f0\i0 . MIT Press.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri2050\sl-328\sb36\f0\fs22\b0 Ford, Heather, and Judy Wajcman. 2017. \'93\'92Anyone Can Edit\'92, Not Everyone Does: Wikipedia\'92s Infrastructure and the Gender Gap\'94. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Social Studies of Science \f0\fs22\b0\i0 47 (4): 511\'96527. doi:\f3 10.1177/0306312717692172\f0 .\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb148\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Hacking, I. 2004. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Historical Ontology\f0\i0 . Harvard University Press.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1978\sl-328\sb108\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Kelty, Christopher M. 2014. \'93Beyond Copyright and \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Technology: \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 What Open Access Can \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Tell \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Us About \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Precarity, Authority, Innovation, \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 and Automation in the University \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Today\'94.\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Cultural\expnd-4\expndtw-18  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Anthropology\expnd-2\expndtw-9  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 29\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 (2):\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 203\'96215.\expnd-3\expndtw-14  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 doi:\f3 10.14506/ca29.2.02\f0 .\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb148\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 \'97\expnd3\expndtw17  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 .\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 2008.\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 Two\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 Bits:\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 The\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Cultural\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Significance\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 of\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd-1\expndtw-6 Free\expnd-3\expndtw-16  \f4\fs22\b0\i1\expnd0\expndtw0 Software\f0\i0 .\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Durham,\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 N.C.:\expnd-3\expndtw-13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Duke University\expnd3\expndtw13  \f0\fs22\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Press.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li120\sl240\slmult1\sb89\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Kelty, Christopher M., et al. 2008. \'93Anthropology In/of Circulation: a Discussion\'94.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\sl240\slmult1\sb75\f4\fs22\b0\i1 Cultural Anthropology \f0\fs22\b0\i0 23 (3).\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1698\sl-328\sb108\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Massanari, Adrienne. 2016. \'93#gamergate and the Fappening: How Reddit\'92s Algorithm, Governance, and Culture Support Toxic Technocultures\'94. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 New Media & Society \f0\fs22\b0\i0 19 (3): 329\'96346. doi:\f3 10.1177/1461444815608807\f0 .\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri2219\sl-328\sb92\f0\fs22\b0 Nafus, Dawn. 2012. \'93\'91Patches don\'92t have gender\'92: What is not open in open source software\'94. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 New Media & Society \f0\fs22\b0\i0 14, no. 4 (): 669\'96683. Visited on 04/01/2014. doi:\f3 10.1177/1461444811422887\f0 .\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1978\sl312\slmult1\sb148\f0\fs22\b0 Rabinow, Paul. 2003. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 Anthropos Today: Reflections on Modern Equipment\f0\i0 . Princeton University Press.\par\pard\plain\s1\nooverflow\nocwrap\li458\fi-339\ri1978\sl235\slmult1\sb93\f0\fs22\b0\charscalex105 Reagle, Joseph. 2013. \'93"Free As in Sexist?" Free Culture and the Gender Gap\'94. \f4\fs22\b0\i1 First Monday \f0\fs22\b0\i0 18 (1): nil. doi:\f3 10.5210/fm.v18i1.4291\f0 .\par}